chore(blog): using JSON Schema beyond validation (#314)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/json-schema-beyond-validation.md

---
title: "Using JSON Schema beyond validation"
date: 2021-07-27T12:00:00+01:00
type: Engineering
tags:
  - tools
  - code generation
  - JSON Schema
cover: /img/posts/jonaslagoni/json-schema-beyond-validation/halgatewood-com-QM9yzAoX-GQ-unsplash.webp
authors:
  - name: Jonas Lagoni
    photo: /img/avatars/jonaslagoni.webp
    link: https://github.com/jonaslagoni
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer
featured: true
---

What is JSON Schema, why is it important and why is it so hard to use beyond validation? 

For those unfamiliar with Asyncapi [we use a superset of JSON Schema](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/2.0.0#schemaObject) as the default format for defining operation payloads, headers, channel parameter schemas, etc.

> Even though we allow other formats such as Avro, OpenAPI 3.x and Swagger 2.x, RAML schemas in its place, as soon as it hits the parser (which most tooling utilizes), said formats are converted to JSON Schema draft 7 to ensure a [common structure for tooling](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/blob/826b36922260254ba23d162cda309fc72f552c49/lib/models/message.js#L20). 

Reviewer: Just to add more useful context for the reader:

```suggestion
Even though we allow other formats such as Avro, OpenAPI 3.x and Swagger 2.x, RAML schemas in its place, as soon as it hits the parser (which most tooling utilizes), said formats are converted to [JSON Schema draft 7](https://json-schema.org/specification-links.html#draft-7) to ensure a [common structure for tooling](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/blob/826b36922260254ba23d162cda309fc72f552c49/lib/models/message.js#L20). 
```

> However, in tooling, many times you do not want to validate data, but know the structure of the data. For example for the payload of messages, in specific programming languages, how do you represent such data so it is easier to interact with, such as classes that represent the payload? 

Reviewer: I feel this sentence is hard to read, especially for someone without context. I'm trying to simplify it and all it comes is the following: 

```suggestion
However, in tooling, many times you do not want to validate data, but to represent the data in a structured manner so it is easier to interact with, such as classes that represent a message payload? 
```

Feel free to discard my suggestion anyway.

Author: I like it 👍 

Gonna change it a bit

```suggestion
However, in tooling, many times you do not want to validate data, but to represent the data in a structured manner so it is easier to interact with, such as classes that represent a message payload.
```

## Quick intro to JSON Schema

Let's try and take a look at an example. Given the following, we have a schema representing the validation rules that our data should comply with. 

<figure>

>   <img src="../img/posts/jonaslagoni/json-schema-beyond-validation/json-schema-process.webp" title="Processor setup"/>

Reviewer: Would you mind adding an `alt` to the `<img>` that can help people with screen readers to visualize? Still can combine with the `<figcaption>`: https://thoughtbot.com/blog/alt-vs-figcaption#what-not-to-do

  <figcaption className="text-center text-gray-400 text-sm">Displays the overall process of validating data using JSON Schema.</figcaption>
</figure>

> The JSON Schema defines that the JSON data should be an object, which requires a property called `someRequiredProperty` to always be present and an optional property called `someOptionalProperty`. `someRequiredProperty` should validate against an integer and and `someOptionalProperty` against an arbitrary string. The schema also dictates that no additional properties (`"additionalProperties": false`) may be allowed. There is also some metadata defined, called `$id` and `$schema`, but they are not important for this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JSON Schema defines that the JSON data should be an object, which requires a property called `someRequiredProperty` to always be present and an optional property called `someOptionalProperty`. `someRequiredProperty` should validate against an integer and `someOptionalProperty` against an arbitrary string. The schema also dictates that no additional properties (`"additionalProperties": false`) may be allowed. There is also some metadata defined, called `$id` and `$schema`, but they are not important for this example.
```

If we then take a look at the example [data instances](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-4.2), the first one contains the required property, and the second one both the required and the optional property.

> The data and the JSON Schema can then together, validate whether the data is an instance of the schema i.e. validate whether the data comply with the validation rules and giving a simple true or false statement whether they are compatible.

Reviewer: Nitpick: `whether` word is used three times in this sentence. Perhaps combining it with `if` or similar would be nice.

> The data and the JSON Schema can then together, validate whether the data is an instance of the schema i.e. validate whether the data comply with the validation rules and giving a simple true or false statement whether they are compatible.

Reviewer: Nitpick:
```suggestion
The data and the JSON Schema can then together, validate whether the data is an instance of the schema, i.e., validate whether the data comply with the validation rules and giving a simple true or false statement whether they are compatible.
```

> This is an extremely powerful tool which allows you to create complex validation rules for data, that would not otherwise be easy to do, if you used other specification which defines the data model using [TypeSchema](https://typeschema.org/), [JTD](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8927), etc.

Reviewer: Just to emphasize the sentence and to clarify what we are talking about (leading to zero confusion):

```suggestion
JSON Schema is an extremely powerful tool which allows you to create complex validation rules for data, that would not otherwise be easy to do, if you used other specification which defines the data model using [TypeSchema](https://typeschema.org/), [JTD](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8927), etc.
```

> This is an extremely powerful tool which allows you to create complex validation rules for data, that would not otherwise be easy to do, if you used other specification which defines the data model using [TypeSchema](https://typeschema.org/), [JTD](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8927), etc.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand this sentence fully:

> , if you used other specification which defines the data model using [TypeSchema](https://typeschema.org/)

Do you mean that by using some tooling of other specs you won't have TS models? As you can see, it is not cristal clear to me.

Author: I removed the reference to other protocols here and moved the section to the last section, as it is more relevant there 😄

## The problems of using JSON Schema as data definitions

Many of the JSON Schema keywords are for [JSON instance validation](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-validation-01), which means specifying validation rules that data should comply with. However, what if you wanted to know the definition of the data rather than what it should validate against? That is currently not something JSON Schema provides to you, even though it is such an important part of tooling. Let's deep dive a bit into JSON Schema and see where some of the complexity lies:

> Of course not all JSON Schemas are complex to interpret to data definition. For our simple example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice: how we use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.

Reviewer: Possible typos?
```suggestion
Of course not all JSON Schemas are complex to interpret their data definition. For our previous example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice how we use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.
```

Author: `previous` is better yes! However, `their` does not fit on its own, what about `to their`? 🤔 

```suggestion
Of course not all JSON Schemas are complex to interpret to their data definition. For our previous example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice how we use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.
```

Reviewer: Still sounds weird to me. What about something like:

> However, interpreting data definition from a JSON Schema is not always that complex. For our previous example...

Author: I like it 👍 

```suggestion
However, interpreting data definition from a JSON Schema is not always complex. For our previous example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice how we use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.
```

Reviewer: Awesome!

> It of course not all JSON Schemas that are complex to interpret to data definition. For our simple example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice: how we use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course not all JSON Schemas are complex to interpret to data definition. For our simple example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice: how we use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.
```

```ts
class SomeIdForSchema {
  public someRequiredProperty: number;
  public someOptionalProperty?: string;
}
```

In theory, we use the very same validation rules and interpret them, such that the output gives us the definition of what form the data may take. Sounds easy enough right? :sweat_smile:

> The problem is JSON Schema, which might seem simple on the surface, is complex underneath when you start to interpret the recursive keywords such as `not`, `then`, `else`, `allOf`, `oneOf`, etc. This causes the possibilities to be endless in terms of how the JSON Schema document can be structured (at least endless in principle).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The problem is that JSON Schema –which might seem simple on the surface— is complex underneath when you start to interpret the recursive keywords such as `not`, `if`, `then`, `else`, `allOf`, `oneOf`, etc. This causes the possibilities to be endless in terms of how the JSON Schema document can be structured (at least endless in principle).
```

> The problem is that JSON Schema –which might seem simple on the surface— is complex underneath when you start to interpret the recursive keywords such as `not`, `if`, `then`, `else`, `allOf`, `oneOf`, etc. This causes the possibilities to be endless in terms of how the JSON Schema document can be structured (at least endless in principle).

Reviewer: traversed maybe?

```suggestion
The problem is that JSON Schema –which might seem simple on the surface— is complex underneath when you start to interpret the recursive keywords such as `not`, `if`, `then`, `else`, `allOf`, `oneOf`, etc. This causes the possibilities to be endless in terms of how the JSON Schema document can be traversed (at least endless in principle).
```

Skip it if does not apply!

Author: Both traversed and structured in a sense. I refer to the fact that you could have the recursive structure, as it is allowed:
```
{not: { not: { not: { type: string } } } } 
```

  }
}
```

**Take a moment and think about what data would you say is valid against this schema?**

In the very simplest form the JSON Schema could be converted to the following:
```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
  "type": "object",
  "$id": "SomeIdForSchema",
  "additionalProperties": false,
  "properties": {
    "someOptionalProperty": {
      "type": "string"
    } 
  }
}
```
Where the property `someOptionalProperty` may only be of type `string`. But, let's try and break the complex schema down step by step, to show how the validation would work against the data:
```json
{
  "someOptionalProperty": "string"
}
```
Notice how the `not` keyword reverses the validation result after step 5.
```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#", 
  "type": "object",               //Step 1 
  "$id": "SomeIdForSchema", 
  "additionalProperties": false,  //Step 2 
  "properties": { 
    "someOptionalProperty": {     //Step 3
      "type": ["string", "number"]//Step 4
    } 
  },
  "not": {                        //Step 6
    "properties": {
      "someOptionalProperty": { 
        "type": "number"          //Step 5
      } 
    }
  }
}
```

> 1. Step: accept, as the input is of type object.
> 1. Step: accept, as no additional properties have been defined.
> 1. Step: accept, as we have such a property
> 1. Step: accept, as the property is type string
> 1. Step: reject - as the data is of type string
> 1. Step: accept (negate step 5) - as we negate the validation result of the inner schema which was rejected in step 5. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Step: accept, as the input is of type object.
2. Step: accept, as no additional properties have been defined.
3. Step: accept, as we have such a property
4. Step: accept, as the property is type string
5. Step: reject - as the data is of type string
6. Step: accept (negate step 5) - as we negate the validation result of the inner schema which was rejected in step 5. 
```

---

> title: "Using JSON Schema beyond validation"

Reviewer 3: we are not very much consistent with cases in titles, but I think the correct one would be to use upper case

```suggestion
title: "Using JSON Schema Beyond Validation"
```

## Quick intro to JSON Schema

Let's try and take a look at an example. Given the following, we have a schema representing the validation rules that our data should comply with. 

<figure>
  <img src="../img/posts/jonaslagoni/json-schema-beyond-validation/json-schema-process.webp" title="JSON Schema validation process" alt="Shows the overall JSON Schema validation process of how a JSON Schema and some data is validated against each other."/>
  <figcaption className="text-center text-gray-400 text-sm">Displays the overall process of validating data using JSON Schema.</figcaption>
</figure>

The JSON Schema defines that the JSON data should be an object, which requires a property called `someRequiredProperty` to always be present and an optional property called `someOptionalProperty`. `someRequiredProperty` should validate against an integer and `someOptionalProperty` against an arbitrary string. The schema also dictates that no additional properties (`"additionalProperties": false`) may be allowed. There is also some metadata defined, called `$id` and `$schema`, but they are not important for this example.

> If we then take a look at the example [data instances](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-4.2), the first one contains the required property, and the second one both the required and the optional property.

Reviewer 3: are you referring to some specific example here, I clicked the link but I'm lost

Author: I see 😅 Reformulated the sentence to 
```
If we then take a look at the example data instances (below the JSON Schema in the figure), the first one contains the required property, and the second one has both the required and the optional property.
```

Reviewer 3: oh, well done, I just misunderstood you link to an example and not that you want to provide a reference for people to understand what data instances is 😅

The data and the JSON Schema can then together, validate whether the data is an instance of the schema, i.e., validate if the data comply with the validation rules and give a simple true or false statement if they are compatible.

JSON Schema is an extremely powerful tool which allows you to create complex validation rules for data and is the standard specification used in not only AsyncAPI but also OpenAPI.

> ## The problems of using JSON Schema as data definitions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Challenges using JSON Schema for data definitions
```

what do you think?

Author: Makes sense!

Many of the JSON Schema keywords are for [JSON instance validation](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-validation-01), which means specifying validation rules that data should comply with. However, what if you wanted to know the definition of the data rather than what it should validate against? That is currently not something JSON Schema provides to you, even though it is such an important part of tooling. Let's deep dive a bit into JSON Schema and see where some of the complexity lies.

> However, interpreting data definition from a JSON Schema is not always complex. For our previous example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice how we use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.

Reviewer 3: after reading `Let's deep dive a bit into JSON Schema and see where some of the complexity lies.`, seeing word `However` somehow got me confused. We talk about complexity, then want to deep dive and all suddenly we say it is not always complex.

maybe instead of `However` write something like `First let me show you how to interpret data definition from a trivial schema`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, interpreting data definition from a JSON Schema is not always complex. For our previous example, we can almost interpret it as is. If I wanted a class in TypeScript that represented the data, it could look something like this (gonna use TS syntax as examples throughout). Notice how I use the `$id` keyword to define the name of such a class.
```

just a suggestion that you would have to apply to entire article, I just prefer first person content, not plural. Up to you

Author: Is the following better?
```
... First, let me show you how to interpret data definition from the example above for then to move into a more complex JSON Schema to further highlight the complexity. 

Interpreting data definition ...
```

Reviewer 3: ```
First, let me show you how to interpret data definition from the above example for then to move into a more complex JSON Schema. 
```

`to further highlight the complexity` no needed as  `complex JSON Schema.` is clear in that context + the sentence would get complicated

Author: > just a suggestion that you would have to apply to entire article, I just prefer first person content, not plural. Up to you

For many of the contexts, I don't feel like the first-person perspective makes sense.

      "someOptionalProperty": {
        "type": "number"
      } 
    }
  }
}
```
**Take a moment and think about what data would you say is valid against this schema?**

In the very simplest form the JSON Schema could be converted to the following:
```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
  "type": "object",
  "$id": "SomeIdForSchema",
  "additionalProperties": false,
  "properties": {
    "someOptionalProperty": {
      "type": "string"
    } 
  }
}
```
Where the property `someOptionalProperty` may only be of type `string`. But, let's try and break the complex schema down step by step, to show how the validation would work against the data:
```json
{
  "someOptionalProperty": "string"
}
```
Notice how the `not` keyword reverses the validation result after step 5.
```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#", 
  "type": "object",               //Step 1 
  "$id": "SomeIdForSchema", 
  "additionalProperties": false,  //Step 2 
  "properties": { 
    "someOptionalProperty": {     //Step 3
      "type": ["string", "number"]//Step 4
    } 
  },
  "not": {                        //Step 6
    "properties": {
      "someOptionalProperty": { 

>         "type": "number"          //Step 5

Reviewer 3: I miss the point why this is step 5 and not 6 😅

Author: Good point, I kinda jump over that point, gonna adapt the description 👍

Author: Added the following above `Notice how the `not` keyword reverses the validation result of step 5, which is why the inner schema is validated before the keyword itself.`

Reviewer 3: interesting, I didn't know it is suppose to work this way

---
title: "Using JSON Schema Beyond Validation"

> date: 2021-07-31T12:00:00+01:00

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-08-03T12:00:00+01:00
```

```ts
class SomeIdForSchema {
  public someOptionalProperty?: string;
}
``` 
## The interpretation of JSON Schema

So, how can we create an algorithm that will enable us to consistently and accurately represent the underlying data model for the JSON data? How can this be standardized across all versions of JSON Schema (as we might not stay on Draft 7 forever)? 

Some of the alternatives to JSON Schema is specification such as [TypeSchema](https://typeschema.org/) or [JTD](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8927), that instead of focusing on validation, you focus on the definition of data models. Using these as the standard definition for payloads would indeed solve the problem in terms of data definitions in tooling. However, doing so neglect many important features of JSON Schema that simply cannot be done by defining the models, and we are left with the very same problem of transforming `JSON Schema -> TypeSchema` or `JSON Schema -> JTD`, which to some extent is the process we are trying to figure out.

> In terms of the algorithm, it is highly work in progress :smiley: For [Modelina](github.com/asyncapi/modelina) we have our own process, but... It is something we are trying to solve collectively (as AsyncAPI is not the only one with this problem, [OAI, IBM](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/issues/2542), etc) in the JSON Schema organization. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In terms of the algorithm, it is highly work in progress :smiley: For [Modelina](https://github.com/asyncapi/modelina) we have our own process, but... It is something we are trying to solve collectively (as AsyncAPI is not the only one with this problem, [OAI, IBM](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/issues/2542), etc) in the JSON Schema organization. 
```
